An oil tanker left the Libyan port of Ras Lanuf for Italy early on Wednesday with the first crude export cargo from the terminal since at least late 2014, boosting hopes of reviving Libya's oil output.
The port manager of Ras Lanuf said a second tanker was preparing to load at the terminal, one of four seized on Sept. 11-12 by eastern Libyan forces loyal to military leader Khalifa Haftar.
Libya's National Oil Corporation (NOC) has welcomed a promise by Haftar's forces to allow the NOC to control the ports. NOC Chairman Mustafa Sanalla said on Wednesday that national production had risen to about 390,000 barrels per day (bpd) from less than 290,000 bpd before the change of control at the ports.
Any boost in production through the ports could also benefit the United Nations-backed Government of National Accord (GNA) in Tripoli as it tries to unite rival armed factions and stabilize the economy, though Haftar has so far rejected the GNA.
The NOC said last week it would begin exports immediately from Ras Lanuf and Zueitina, and that it would start them as soon as possible from Es Sider. Exports have continued from Brega, the fourth port that was seized and that had remained open.
Together, the ports have a capacity of nearly 800,000 barrels per day (bpd), though Ras Lanuf and Es Sider have been damaged in clashes and Brega has been operating at below its maximum capacity.
Armed conflict and disputes have left Libya's oil installations under the control of different factions and cut output to a fraction of the 1.6 million bpd it produced before an uprising toppled Muammar Gaddafi in 2011.
The NOC has ambitious goals of producing more than 900,000 bpd by the end of the year, but says it needs funding for its operating budget and the reopening of blockaded pipelines in western Libya to reach that target.
Sanalla said on Wednesday that the NOC had so far received 310 million Libyan dinars ($220 million) from the GNA, and had been promised another 300 million. "These amounts of money are not enough but we take into account the difficult financial situation currently," he said.
Haftar's forces seized the ports from a rival armed group that had controlled them for more than two years, and fended off a counter attack on Sunday.
Many in western Libya suspect Haftar, a former Gaddafi ally, of plotting to take power nationally.
Factions that support him have tried to export oil from eastern Libya independently, bypassing the NOC in Tripoli, though they have also allowed oil shipments for NOC Tripoli to continue from the eastern port of Hariga.
Also In Commodities
OPEC agrees modest oil output curbs in first deal since 2008
Devil's in the details of OPEC deal as Asia buyers remain cautious
After Haftar's forces seized the ports the United States and major European powers called for them to withdraw, cautioning that they would move to block any shipments that took place outside the authority of the GNA.
The Seadelta tanker that left Ras Lanuf on Wednesday loaded with 700,000 barrels of crude and the second tanker that was preparing to load were both arranged before Haftar's forces seized the ports.
Sanalla has said he received the go-ahead from the GNA's leadership before moving to open the ports last week, and that export earnings would be channeled through Tripoli. "The increase of oil production will help earn more money and the revenues will go to the central bank," he said on Wednesday.
A tanker returned to Libya’s third-biggest oil port to load a cargo a day after clashes between rival armed forces forced it to sail away to safety, in what would be the first overseas crude shipment from the terminal of Ras Lanuf since 2014.
The vessel Seadelta was to resume loading 781,000 barrels of oil for shipment to Italy within four hours, Nasser Delaab, petroleum operations inspector at Harouge Oil Operations, said Monday by phone. The ship would be full 18 hours after that, he said. Another tanker, the Syra, would arrive in Ras Lanuf later on Monday to ship 600,000 barrels of crude to Italy, he said.
The Seadelta halted loading amid fighting that complicated efforts to end a five-year conflict that has slashed Libya’s oil exports. Forces loyal to eastern-based military commander Khalifa Haftar repulsed a local Petroleum Facilities Guard unit that tried on Sunday to seize control of Ras Lanuf and the country’s largest oil port of Es Sider in east Libya, Mohammad Al-Azoumi, spokesman for a battalion under Haftar’s command, said by phone. Five petroleum guards were killed during the clashes, he said.
Output Slashed
The OPEC country is seeking to boost crude exports after fighting among rival militias slashed oil production following the 2011 ouster of former dictator Moammar Al Qaddafi. The conflict halted exports from the nation’s main oil ports of Es Sider, Zueitina and Ras Lanuf as the country struggled to form a unified national government. The National Oil Corp. planned to resume exports from the ports after reaching an accord with Haftar, who seized control of the facilities last week.
Brent crude gained as much as 2.5 percent to $46.93 a barrel and traded at $46.71 as of 4:46 p.m. in London on Monday. Haftar took Ras Lanuf and Es Sider from Ibrahim Jadran, leader of local Petroleum Facilities Guard units, giving the eastern region’s powerful military chief control of both shipping terminals and oil fields in Libya’s main producing areas. 
The Seadelta had been loading crude from onshore storage tanks on Sunday before being interrupted, said Delaab, who helps organize oil movements at Ras Lanuf. The vessel arrived there from Trieste, Italy, according to tanker tracking data compiled by Bloomberg. The Syra was navigating off the Libyan coast as of Monday evening local time, according to the tracking data.
Largest Reserves
Close all those tabs. Open this email.
Get Bloomberg's daily newsletter.
Libya, if it succeeds in shipping the Seadelta cargo from Ras Lanuf, will be selling into an oversupplied market in which crude is trading at about half its 2014 levels. The country holds Africa’s largest oil reserves and pumped 1.6 million barrels of crude a day before Qaddafi’s ouster. Production has tumbled since then to 260,000 barrels a day in August, according to data compiled by Bloomberg, and Libya now ranks as the second-smallest producer in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, after Gabon.
Harouge Oil pumped about 100,000 barrels a day through the end of 2014 but halted operations due to fighting in the country, Delaab said. The company has production rights to at least five oil fields around Ras Lanuf, according to its website.
Libyan Field Marshal Khalifa Haftar has attacked the UN Special Envoy for Libya Martin Kobler calling him a “failure” and demanded he be fired.
The former general who was promoted to his new rank last week after capturing four key oil terminals said Kobler was “meddling in very sensitive issues”.
Kobler has tried to meet Haftar on a few occasions for reconciliation efforts between the UN-backed Government of National Accord (GNA) and Haftar’s forces but he refused the invitations as “time was too precious to be wasted in pointless discussions” according to the Libya Herald.
The speaker of the Tobruk-based House of Representatives has also called for a new envoy to be appointed if Kobler does not change his style of mediation.
Speaking to Russia’s Sputnik news agency, Aqilah Saleh is Kobler is unable to do good for Libya.
“This man intervenes in everything, but he will be incapable to do any good for Libya,” Saleh said.
Kobler was appointed to the post of the UN special envoy to Libya in November 2015.
Forces opposed to Libya's unity government have seized a fourth oil port, Brega, completing their takeover of vital installations in the North African country's "oil crescent", according to military sources.
The UN-backed Government of National Accord (GNA) based in Tripoli is struggling to assert its authority and has faced staunch resistance from a rival administration based in Libya's remote east.
Forces loyal to Khalifa Haftar, a renegade general, on Sunday launched an offensive on Libya's "oil crescent" along the northern coast.
READ MORE: UK parliament report criticises Libya intervention
Haftar, 73, who sees himself as Libya's saviour after battling conservative armed groups out of most of second city Benghazi in the east, backs the Bayda-based parliament which has refused to grant the GNA a vote of confidence.
His forces fought off guards to gain control of the oil terminals at Ras Lanuf, Al-Sidra and Zuwaytania, and they finally secured Brega unopposed on Tuesday.
"We have taken control of the Brega port completely and without any fighting," said Colonel Muftah al-Muqarief, who heads oil guards loyal to Haftar.
"The entire oil crescent region is now under our control," Muqarief told AFP news agency.
Brega was taken largely thanks to "mediation involving residents and town elders", he said.
Western condemnation
The Brega takeover came just hours after the United States and its major European allies - which back the GNA - condemned Haftar's offensive.
The US, France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Britain said the UN-brokered government based in the capital, Tripoli, is the "sole steward of these resources", adding that "Libya's oil belongs to the Libyan people".
"We also call on all forces to avoid any action that could damage Libya's energy infrastructure or further disrupt its exports," said the joint statement, issued late on Monday.
Haftar's forces have driven conservative armed groups out of most of Benghazi [Reuters]
It also warned against "illicit oil exports".
The statement echoed remarks by Martin Kobler, the UN special envoy, on Monday.
"I call for the respect of UN Security Council Resolution 2259, which recognises the Government of National Accord ... as the sole executive authority in Libya," Kobler said.
Oil is Libya's main natural resource, with reserves estimated at 48 billion barrels, the largest in Africa, but production has dropped since 2011 when the country plunged into turmoil.
On Sunday, Haftar's forces took Al-Sidra and Ras Lanuf ports before attacking Zuwaytina to the east.
The "oil crescent" lies between Benghazi and Gaddafi's hometown of Sirte, where pro-GNA forces have been battling the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) group since May.
'Flagrant aggression'
It was the first time Haftar's forces and fighters loyal to the GNA clashed directly since the unity government started working in Tripoli in March.
Kobler said oil installations must remain under the authority of the GNA's presidential council and stressed that Resolution 2259 "contains a clear prohibition on illicit oil exports".
The GNA called on loyalist forces to "protect and defend" the ports against what it called a "flagrant aggression" against Libya's sovereignty.
For his part, the head of the rival government, Abdullah al-Thani, said from Bayda that his administration "will work on the oil ports resuming work as soon as possible so as to guarantee all Libyans a decent life".
Aguila Saleh, speaker of the Bayda-based parliament, said Haftar's forces would withdraw and hand over the ports to the National Oil Corporation (NOC) to resume oil exports.
He said Haftar's move was by "popular demand" and was authorised by Libya's official institutions.
The Jedran factor
Saleh said Haftar's forces "liberated the fields and the terminals from the occupiers and those hindering exports", referring to Ibrahim Jedran, who commands a force known as Petroleum Facilities Guards.
Jedran's fighters seized the oil terminals more than two years ago and have tried to export illegally in the past.
It is now allied with the GNA, and Kobler brokered a deal with Jedran in July to resume exports.

The NOC is split into two rival branches, one allied to the GNA and the other to the administration that Haftar supports.
On Tuesday, the NOC branch allied with Haftar said it would immediately start working to resume crude exports from ports seized by his forces.
"Our technical teams already started assessing what needs to be done to lift force majeure and restart exports as soon as possible," Mustafa Sanalla, NOC chairman, said in a statement.
The battle for control of Libya's oil assets has renewed fears of a civil war in the country, which plunged into chaos after the 2011 uprising that toppled and killed longtime leader Muammar Gaddafi.
Tunis- U.N. Secretary General’s Special Envoy to Libya Martin Kobler said that formation of a national unity government and receiving a vote of confidence were still presenting a challenge.
Kobler held a press conference at the end of the inter-Libyan dialogue in Tunis during which he presented the outcome of the talks. He stressed that the only way to end the crisis in Libya is by forming a strong government.
Members of the Libyan Political Dialogue and others held on Monday two days of consultative meetings in Tunis to try to find a way out of the Libyan political crisis and commit to the political agreement signed in Skhirat, Morocco last year.
During the political dialogue, several points of disagreement had been discussed. Member of the political dialogue committee Toufiq al-Shouhaibi said that the participants haven’t reached an agreement yet and denied that the position of Minister of Defense is the sticking point.
Shouhaibi told the press that “the issue is bigger than that.”
He explained that General Khalifa Haftar is a controversial person knowing that he is accepted in Benghazi and rejected in Tripoli.
Libyan media sources unveiled that the Libyan parties had disagreements concerning the Government of National Accord (GNA) with some calling for the formation of a new cabinet and canceling all the previous decisions of the presidential council.
Head of Presidential Council and Prime Minister Fayez al-Sarraj confirmed that any military leadership must work under the umbrella of the political leadership, hinting to Haftar.
Sarraj stressed that Article 8 of the political agreement must be respected.
The article states that all military and so-called sovereign portfolios should be transferred to the presidential council, including the position of the general commander of the Libyan army currently occupied by Haftar.
The U.N.-backed GNA headed by Sarraj has lost a parliamentary vote of confidence, which resulted in a dispute regarding the fate of the presidential council.
Observers believe that the Tunis meeting will not have any positive outcomes given that an agreement hasn’t been reached, especially about Article 8. 
Oil is the lifeblood of the Libyan economy. Prior to the 2011 revolution that toppled Muammar Gaddafi, Libya produced some 1.6 million barrels a day, exported mostly to Italy, Germany, Spain, and France. Natural gas and oil revenues made up nearly 96% of government revenue, propping up a vast public sector and providing millions of Libyans with their main source of income.
When a revolution backed by NATO air strikes brought Gaddafi’s regime to a bloody end in the summer of 2011, output plummeted to zero. To the surprise of many analysts, it quickly recovered, reaching 1.4 million barrels per day, almost hitting pre-revolution levels. But that figure belied growing political divides that would soon bring the oil industry - and Libya’s economy - to its knees.
As the coalition that brought down Gaddafi started to fragment, local grievances over the distribution of oil revenues led to protests, closing down oil fields, pipelines and loading ports. In the east, a rebel leader charged with protecting the oil infrastructure seized control of several ports, demanding greater autonomy and a bigger share of oil revenues for his region.
His attempts to sell oil internationally without the government’s consent were only thwarted when US navy commandos stormed a tanker trying to take oil out of the country. Meanwhile, a militia in the west shut down two of the country’s most important oil fields, and insecurity grew. International oil companies fled as security deteriorated.
In January 2015, the price of oil dipped below
per barrel for the first time since 2009.
In 2014, Libya became more divided. Fighting between rival militias displaced hundreds of thousands of people. The internationally recognised government fled from the capital Tripoli to the eastern city of Tobruk and a rival authority sprang up in the capital, with both sides being supported by outside players. 
While the national oil company largely stayed out of politics, control of oil facilities became a key bargaining chip for militias and their political backers. Falling oil revenues meant the central bank had to dip into Libya’s foreign currency reserves to pay salaries. Many public sector workers went months without being paid.
International oil prices tumbled throughout late 2014, and it became less clear who was actually in charge of Libya’s oil. Security risks and the unclear legal environment made foreign oil companies wary of working in Libya or even buying Libyan oil. Meanwhile, government finances look weaker than ever and militias continue to battle for control of the country’s oil infrastructure. The UN is attempting to bring an end to the bloody stalemate that has crippled the country. But until there is some agreement over how to manage the oil sector and distribute the income, the outlook for Libya is distinctly bleak.
Sirte, Libya — From the second floor of a school, Abdallah Karim, 20, gazes at downtown Sirte, at buildings blown apart, streets littered with broken glass and rubble — his hometown reduced to a field of ruins.
Still, he says, he enjoys the view.
“I really don’t care about the destruction of my city. Look, over there, my house was there,” said Mr. Karim, a fighter from the Defense Misrata brigade, pointing to a destroyed building through the large window. “I don’t care. I just want the Islamic State men to be dead.”
The last holdouts of the jihadi group are clinging to a square half-mile area of this strategic coastal city, the Islamic State group’s “capital” in Libya and once its most formidable outpost outside of its base in Syria and Iraq. Misrata fighters, part of the U.N.-backed Government of National Accord Forces, continue to make advances against the surrounded group.
Although the GNA forces expect to capture Sirte within the next month, the Misrata fighters say they are bracing for a wider war over who will rule Libya.
U.N. officials and private analysts anticipate that clash soon and are not sure Libya, as a functioning state, can survive it.